MUS/HWST 176The History of Hawaiian MusicSemester Dates (08/25/25 - 12/19/25)
ResourcesBorrow TechnologyBook a Study SpaceUHMC IT HelpLibrary & Research HelpPrintingTestingTutoringLearning Resources                                                                              
ContactsMy UHLamak?STAR ServicesDisability ServicesStudent LifeFinancial AidTitle IXSecurity
Stay ConnectedDownload the UHMC App from the Apple App Store or get it on Google Play     
Contact Info
Instructor: Dr. Keola DonaghyZoom: (request by mail)Office: Ka‘a‘ike 113Office Hours:  By appointmentEmail: donaghy@hawaii.eduPhone: 808-984-3570
Welcome                                                                                                                             Aloha e n? haum?na (welcome, students) to MUS/HWST 176 History of Hawaiian Music. It does not matter which of these two classes you registered for, we will cover the same content and the requirements are all the same.Class Meeting Days/Times and Location:This class is conducted completely online and asynchronously (i.e., you are not required to be logged in at any particular time to complete assignments or text. The class will utilize a number of Internet technologies, including Laulima, YouTube, and various web streaming technologies for audio and video. Required Textbook, Materials, Resources, Supplies, Technology, Technical SkillsRequired Textbook? None. Your instructor will provide you with all necessary reading materials.Required Materials, Resources, Supplies, and Technology       In our “Resources” area you will find a document entitled “ Recommended Readings For Research.” Some of these papers are available as PDF files from our Laulima site. Simply go to the “Resources” area and look in the folder entitled “Readings.” If you have difficulty locating any that you are interested in, please contact your instructor.? A recent computer.? Reliable high-speed Internet connection.? Reliable high-speed Internet connection.? Speakers or headphones capable of producing high-quality audio are also recommended for listening to pre-recorded lectures and other audio/video resources. You will find it difficult to listen to the nuances of the recordings you will listen to with just your computer’s speakers or cheap earplugs or headphones.? Supported browsers for Lamak?. ? Google Chrome? Mozilla Firefox? Apple Safari? Microsoft Edge? Adobe (Acrobat) Reader. Download Adobe Reader for free.? Digital or cloud-based storageTechnical Skill Requirements? Keyboard and basic computer skills.Course InformationAcademic Prerequisites? While the course catalog lists several prerequisites, I will happily waive them for anyone. If you know anyone who might be interested in the class please have them contact me.? Keyboard and basic computer skillsCourse PurposeThis course will expose students to older and more recent forms of Hawaiian music, how these forms have evolved over the past two centuries, and how later genres developed. Course DescriptionThis course focuses on older and western-influenced vocal and instrumental music of Hawai‘i. Dance genres related to the music will also be discussed, although not in as much detail. Music (and dance) will be examined both as an organization of sound (and movement), and as a product of culture and people. Lectures will be supplemented with sound recordings and video presentations of the various music genres discussed.This syllabus and certain details are subject to change. While the major components–the curriculum, quizzes, assignments, and final project–will likely not be modified, I reserve the right to make changes to the schedules and assignments as circumstances, opportunities and challenges dictate.Outline of Weekly Topics? Pule 1 (Week 1): Introduction? Pule 2: Instruments, Terminology, Ethnomusicology? Pule 3: Oli - Chant Forms? Pule 4: Older Hula Forms? Pule 5: Older Hawaiian Instruments? Pule 6: Later Hula Forms and Mele Hawai‘i? Pule 7: H?meni (Hymns)? Pule 8: N? Lani ‘Eh? (The Four Royals)? Pule 9: Midterm? Pule 10: ‘Ukulele? Pule 11: K?k? K? H?‘alu (Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar)? Pule 12: K?k? Kila (Hawaiian Steel Guitar)? Pule 13: Hapa-Haole? Pule 14: The (Second) Hawaiian Renaissance.? Pule 15: Hawaiian Music Activism and Social MovementsCourse CommunicationI prefer communication to be initiated by email. If necessary, I will schedule a Zoom meeting or phone call with any student who requests assistance (my contact information is found at the top of the first page of this syllabus). I do make extensive use of Lamak?’s “Announcements” function and will communicate with you at least weekly when reminding you of all of the deadlines and upcoming assignments. Please note that when you receive these emails, you cannot respond to them directly. If you do create a reply to one of them, be sure to change the recipient address to donaghy@hawaii.edu or I will not receive it!Course ExpectationsWhile students may access these materials any day at any time during the week, there are firm deadlines for the submission of assignments, quizzes, and exams. This is not a “learn at your own pace” course. You cannot fall behind, nor can you accelerate through the modules and move ahead of your classmates in the course. If you desire to achieve a good grade for the course, you need to submit all of your assignments on time. I do not allow late submissions without prior notification and approval, nor do I offer extra credit for students who have not completed required assignments.Student Behavior ExpectationsPlease visit and familiarize yourself with UHMC’s Student Code of Conduct.Class Participation and Classroom ConductEarly in the semester we will use the Lamak? “Forum” function exclusively for students to express their thoughts on topics and questions that I bring forward. I encourage everyone to freely express their opinions (backed as best you can by what you know and have learned about the subject). While students are encouraged to engage in exchanges and debate, it must be done respectfully and address the issues at hand and not directed at your classmates.First Week ParticipationYou will have several quick and easy-to-complete assignments during our first week of class. They are not optional - they are both mandatory and critical. If you fail to complete them or email me to request an extension before the posted deadline (and get my approval), you will be dropped from the class. If this happens, it will be your responsibility to 1) explain to me why you didn’t complete these exercises and have a good excuse for it, and if I agree to allow you back into class,  2) you must email our registrar’s office (uhmctc@hawaii.ed) and cc: me. It is not my responsibility to get you added back into the class - it is yours!ProfessionalismNetiquette (Noun): the rules of etiquette that apply when communicating over computer networks, especially the Internet (Dictionary.com, 2014). Visit the following website to familiarize yourself with The Core Rules of Netiquette (Ross, 2011).Establishing appropriate etiquette for interaction in your online class is vital to developing a positive learning environment.Online discussions and peer feedback on written work are invaluable. However, we must observe appropriate behavior online, like in a classroom. Here are a few guidelines:? Aloha - Online Netiquette? 15 Rules of Netiquette for Online Discussion Boards by Online Education Blog of Touro College.Course CommunicationAs noted above, all communication between instructor and students will be done by email, or, if necessary, a face-to-face or Zoom meeting can be arranged.Use of Lamak?All readings, activities, assignments, and quizzes will be found on Lamak?. It behooves all students to learn how to use it effectively. There is training available on the Lamak? site if you have not used it previously or if you wish to become a more effective learner using it. Read more about Lamak? (D2L Brightspace) Accessibility here.Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI)Since writing, analytical, and critical thinking skills are part of the learning outcomes of this course, all writing assignments should be prepared by the student. Developing strong competencies in this area will prepare you for a competitive workplace. Therefore, AI-generated submissions are not permitted and will be treated as plagiarism. I encourage you to use AI to locate resources relevant to your research project, but also beware as in my use of various AI systems I have found a tremendous amount of inaccurate information about Hawaiian music and Hawaiian language! AI systems also frequently do not provide accurate attribution and mis-identify the authors of books and papers. Don’t trust what any AI system tells you - you need to go out and verify what it tells you. To protect the privacy of all students and maintain a safe learning environment, students are not permitted to use AI-based tools (e.g., Otter.ai, Fireflies.ai, Zoom AI Companion) to record, transcribe, or analyze class conversations. Unauthorized recording may violate campus policies and federal privacy laws, such as the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA).Institutional Learning OutcomesBy the end of this course, the successful student will be able to:1. In online discussions and/or examinations, identify, describe and differentiate the styles and characteristics of pre-contact Hawaiian music as well as modern and western-influenced forms of music that developed in Hawai?i.2. In online examinations and discussions, explain the social and political influences that have affected the evolution and development of Hawaiian music using appropriate Hawaiian and English terminology and concepts.3. Be able to identify and distinguish various forms and characteristics of traditional and foreign-influenced Hawaiian music as presented in recorded examples.4. Present the results of research in a properly formatted and cited written essay.5. Find appropriate online scholarly resources, in print or online, and share their findings in class discussions.6. Use Laulima, the online course management software, to engage in practice exercises and quizzes, to access PDF versions of in-class presentations, to listen to recorded audio samples, and to view instructor announcements.7. A student may choose to create a traditional Hawaiian musical implement using a printed reference work for guidance as extra credit.Course ContentThere are 16 modules, each will be completed over the course of one week. Each module opens on Tuesday at noon, and all assignments and quizzes are to be completed before the following Tuesday at 11:59 PM. Over spring break, the module open the Tuesday prior to spring break will be due the Tuesday after the break.  There will be a mid-term exam that will include all material covered up to that point. There is no final exam, but there will be a final research project that will be discussed later in this syllabus.Please log into our Laulima site and click on “Modules” in the left-hand column to view the weekly modules and the dates that they will be open and when assignments will be due.Research Papers: Proposal, Draft, and Final SubmissionThere are three steps you must complete for this assignment: 1) select a topic and write a proposal, 2) submit a draft, and 3) submit your final paper.Choose one of the following options: 1. Write a report on a Hawaiian music performance that you attend. This must be a performance that you attend this semester, and not something you attended in the past.  It must include research and background information on the performance style, content or specific musical or cultural elements.2. Interview a performer of Hawaiian music. It must include research and background information on the individual, their performance style, how they learned to play and sing Hawaiian music, or other pertinent musical or cultural information. It must include research and background information on the performance style, content or specific musical or cultural elements.3. Undertake a special research project with the instructor's approval. Example: a report on a Hawai‘i genre style not discussed in class, or a report which goes into much greater depth of a particular genre or performer than is presented in class.Proposals must be submitted through our Lamak? - not by email, and not by simply telling me what your subject will be. Instructions for this will be provided online. Your proposal should be a half-page or long paragraph with your name, the subject, an explanation of what you plan to write about, and a listing of some possible sources. You must submit a proposal and have your instructor approve it to be eligible to submit a draft and final paper. Drafts should be at least three pages long and contain your opening statement, closing and most of  the information that you will be submitting with your final paper. Drafts must be submitted via Google Docs by sending me a link. You must submit a draft and have your instructor approve it to be eligible to submit a draft and final paper.In your Final Papers, I will be looking for:Length: 5 pages in length, 12 point Times New Roman font only, 1-inch margins, double-spaced. Final papers must be submitted via Google Docs by sending me a link.Research: All research papers require the use of at least 2 sources, at one of which must be an article from an academic journal, M.A. thesis, Ph.d. dissertation or other scholarly source. The others may be newspaper or magazine articles, album/CD liner notes or other sources. You may not use Wikipedia as a reference, nor may you cite my lectures or lecture notes. However, you may use either to locate other sources. You may use one of our class readings as a reference, but are not required to do so, and you may find another to cite. Citation and Bibliography: All sources must be cited and included in a bibliography using the APA format. See this library source entitled "Cite Your Source!" for more information. Writing, Grammar and Spelling: Your paper should begin with a paragraph that introduces your topic to the reader, leads them through your topic, and closes effectively by summarizing your main points. Clarity of thought, the transition from point to point, grammar, appropriate use of terminology (Hawaiian and English) and spelling (Hawaiian and English) all count. If you have not written a university-level paper or otherwise need help, you should visit The Learning Center.Proposals Due:	Tues., Oct 22, 2024  11:59PMDrafts Due:	Tues., Nov 19, 2024  11:59PMFinal Papers Due:	Tues., Dec 10, 2024.  11:59PMOn The Hawaiian Language: As the University is a state institution with a focus on being a Native Hawaiian place of learning, and because ??lelo Hawai?i (Hawaiian language) is a recognized language by the state of Hawai?i, correct diacritical marks (?okina, or glottal stop, and kahak?, or macron) are expected. I’ve provided a link to the online Hawaiian dictionary (wehewehe.org). Macintosh computers, Windows computers, and iOS devices all ship with Hawaiian keyboards. There is a Hawaiian keyboard available for Android devices and Chrome OS as well, and there is ample documentation of their activation or installation and use on the web. Course Format and ScheduleCourse FormatThere are 16 modules, each will be completed over the course of one week. Each module opens on Tuesday at noon, and all assignments and quizzes are to be completed before the following Tuesday at 11:59 PM. Spring Semester Only: Over spring break, the module open the Tuesday prior to spring break will be due the Tuesday after the break.  There will be a mid-term exam that will include all material covered up to that point. There is no final exam, but there will be a final research project that will be discussed later in this syllabus.Please log into our Laulima site and click on “Modules” in the left-hand column to view the weekly modules and the dates that they will be open and when assignments will be due.Course Schedule? Outline weekly topics and major course events? Due dates for major projects and exams? Indicate holiday dates? Indicate other significant dates from the academic calendarThe schedule is subject to change.Each week will follow the same schedule: our class will open on Tuesday at noon, along with your quizzes, discussion posts and anything else needed or required. Your assignments and quizzes will all be due the following Tuesday at 11:59 PM. Please visit our Lamak? class site for more detailed information about the topics that will be covered each week.Last Day of Instruction 12/11/25Final Evaluation Period 12/13/25 - 12/20/25Our final exam is scheduled for Day/DateTo Be Successful in this Class? Go to the Content tool in Lamak? for detailed weekly instructions.? Keep up with assignments and turn them in on time (nothing will impact your grade more).? Late assignments are NOT accepted except under unusual circumstances, with advance notice and approval from your instructor or in case of documentable hardship or emergency..? Complete all readings, discussion, and quizzes? Follow all criteria for assignments and class projects.? Log into class regularly and ask questions when something needs clarification.? Commit to working 12–15 hours per week for activities and assignments.? Form a 2–3 person study team and exchange contact information within the first two (2) weeks.? Go to The Learning Center and devise a schedule to follow.? Check email and Lamak? at least once daily for updates, communication, etc.? Meet the instructor with specific questions during office hours or by appointment.? Be disciplined and diligent!Add/Drop Withdrawal DatesView the complete Academic Calendar for Fall 2025 Tuition Refund and Withdrawal Deadlines.Grading PolicyLetter grades for the course will be based on the percentage guidelines. Grades will be posted in Lamak? and will not be discussed via email. If you would like to discuss grades, please come during office hours or make an appointment to meet outside of office hours. Please note that the UH Community College system only allows for A, B, C, D, and F. No pluses or minuses are used. Assessment Categories and Weighting:Grades will be based on the following weighted categories (subject to change):Quizzes = 30%Assignments/ForumDiscussions = 15%Midterm Exam = 25%Final Research Proposal, Draft, and Submission =30%Total = 100%Late Assignment PolicyNo late quizzes or assignments will be accepted without prior approval from your instructor.Percentage Guideline and Grading ScaleFinal semester grades are based on the following point system:? A – (90-100%)? B – (80-89%)? C – (70-79%)? D – (60-69%)? F – (0-59%)Attendance PolicyAs the class is taught completely online I will not take attendance. However, as I have noted, you must log in on a weekly basis to complete assignments.Student Service and Support StatementsDisability Services for StudentsIf you have a documented disability and related access needs, you are invited to meet with the Disability Services Counselor at 984-3227, UHMCDS@hawaii.edu, or go to Room C-03 in the Learning Center to discuss resources or services. Students are encouraged to reach out well before the semester begins to ensure adequate time to review and verify their request.Visit and thoroughly read the Student Service Statements webpage for important information, including
? Disability Services? Assessment? Basic Needs? Personal Counseling? Campus Security? UH Alerts? Financial Aid? First-Year Experience Courses? Lactation Room? Non-Discrimination Statement? Safe Zone Program? Student Conduct Code? Student Right to Know/Consumer Information? Title IX? UH Email Communication
Visit and thoroughly read the Student Support Statement webpage for important information, including
? Academic Support Starting Points? Technology for Online Learning? Peer Mentoring and Tutoring? Writing Assistance? Research Help? Learning Resources? Places to Study on Campus? Testing
Lamak? Support ServicesPhone and Email Support is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, including holidays.UH ITS Help Desk– email help@hawaii.edu or call 956-8883 (or 1-800- 558-2669 from the neighbor islands). Lamak? Student FAQsInformation Security for StudentsUHMC Outreach CentersIf you live in Moloka?i, L?na?i, or Hana, access to higher education no longer means a move or a long commute. View the UHMC Outreach Centers webpage for more information.BIO TEXT:Keola Donaghy is the faculty coordinator of both Music Studies and the Institute of Hawaiian Music at UHMC and Chair of the Humanities Department. Keolateach primarily Hawaiian music classes, but occasionally teaches world music, music theory, and other classes as necessary. You may address me as simply "Keola", but if you prefer "Kumu" I'm fine with that too.Keola grew up in Kama‘ole on Maui, attended the old K?hei Elementary School (now the K?hei Youth Center), St. Anthony High School, and spent two years at Maui Community College. My family and Keola moved to Hilo in 1994, Keola attended UH Hilo, and received a BA in Hawaiian Studies and MA in Hawaiian Language and Literature. Keola also received a Ph.D. in Music (ethnomusicology focus) from the University of Otago in Aotearoa (New Zealand), where my family and Keola resided in 2008. Keola taught in Ka Haka ‘Ula O Ke‘elik?lani College of Hawaiian Language from 2004 until 2012 when my wife and Keola returned to Maui and accepted a position at UHMC. Keola recently completed an M.A. in Pacific Island Studies at UH M?noa. Yes, Keola is a perpetual student.Besides teaching, Keola is very active in the music community. Keola has served on the Board of Governors of the Hawai‘i Academy of Recording Arts, which produces the annual "N? H?k? Hanohano Awards," for many years. I'm an active haku mele (composer of Hawaiian song/poetry). Keola most often composes with singer/songwriter/producer Kenneth Makuak?ne (founder of The Pandanus Club). Some of my compositions have been recorded by Kenneth, TPC, Keali‘i Reichel, Amy H?naiali‘i, Willie K. and Amy, O'Brien Eselu, Mailani, Kainani Kahaunaele, Steven Espaniola and many others. Keola has been honored with eight N? H?k? Hanohano Awards as a composer, producer, and performer of Hawaiian music, four of them the for CDs Keola produced for our Institute of Hawaiian Music program, two with my group A‘ea‘e, one with the rock group "Sandemonium" and one for co-producing Kenneth Makuak?ne's recent anthology release.Keola was privileged to work for the late Walter Becker, co-founder of the group Steely Dan in the late 1980s and 1990s, at his studio in ‘Ulupalakua. Keola was an early adaptor of digital music technologies on Maui, so he hired me to configure and maintain those parts of his studio. Keola continue to try to stay abreast with music technology and helped to design and build the amazing recording studio we have at UHMC.Keola’s work in the areas of techological empowerment for speakers of Hawaiian and other Pacific Languages spans decades and addresses multiple technological layers: from low-level font & keyboard customizations, to communication platforms (BBS, online forum), to classroom/online learning, to gamified language tools. He and his colleagues at UH Hilo were featured in Wired Magazine in 1995 for developing Leok?, a pioneering intranet communication in which all user interface elements and communications were in Hawaiian. His contributions help ensure that Hawaiian language users can meaningfully use digital devices and online environments in Hawaiian, supporting revitalization through increased exposure, literacy, and community connectivity.Keola speaks Hawai‘i with a very high degree of proficiency, and te reo M?ori (the M?ori language) at an intermediate level. He has studied Spanish, Gaeilge (Irish Gaelic), and Korean, but is not proficient in any of them at this time.Keola and his wife live in Wailuku. They have a son who lives in Puna on Hawai‘i island with his wife and their granddaughter and grandson, and our daughter and another grandson live in Wailuku.Besides Hawaiian music, Keola mostly listens to many different genres of music - rock, alternative, jazz, Irish, and pop. I'm primarily a guitarist, but also play electric and acoustic bass, a little bit of keyboards, and is highly proficient with music technology. In December 2022, a few friends and Keola released an EP of Hawaiian music with a very strong Country music sound. The group is called A‘ea‘e, and you can hear our music on Spotify and other streaming services.Keola believes in the power of music, its ability to support individual and community aspirations and be an agent of social change. These aspects are foundational to our work in the Institute of Hawaiian Music. My first book, entitled Mele On The Mauna: Perpetuating Genealogies of Hawaiian Musical Activism, was released by Indiana University Press. It discusses the role music played in the struggle to defend Maunakea. His favorite food is fettuccine alfredo. He grew up in Kama‘ole, Maui, lived in Hilo from 1994 until 2012 except for six months he spent living in Dunedin, Aotearoa while pursuing his Ph.D at the University of Otago. His MA in Hawaiian Language and Literature from UH Hilo was a comparative analysis of sung and spoken Hawaiian as heard in the recorded performances of John Kameaaloha Almeida. His Ph.D. thesis in Music at the University of was an ethnographic examination of perceptions of excellence in haku mele (Hawaiian language compositon) that included interviews with 17 prominent Hawaiian language composers. His MA in Pacific Island Studies presented a framework by which the Indigenous languages of Polnesian could be taught through each other rather than though the colonizer languages of the Pacific.2 of 31